feat(self-managed): aws opensearch doc (#4406)
camunda/camunda-docs: docs/self-managed/setup/deploy/amazon/amazon-eks/terraform-setup.md

---
id: eks-terraform

> title: "Deploy an EKS cluster with Terraform (stable)"

Reviewer: I'd not add the `(stable)`, same as eksctl either tags.

What is stable even referring to and why isn't the rest stable?

description: "Deploy an Amazon Kubernetes Cluster (EKS) with a Terraform module for a quick Camunda 8 setup."
---

import Tabs from "@theme/Tabs";
import TabItem from "@theme/TabItem";

This guide offers a detailed tutorial for deploying an Amazon Web Services (AWS) Elastic Kubernetes Service (EKS) cluster, tailored explicitly for deploying Camunda 8 and using Terraform, a popular Infrastructure as Code (IaC) tool.

It is recommended to use this guide for building a robust and sustainable infrastructure over time. However, for a quicker trial or proof of concept, using the [eksctl](./eksctl.md) method may suffice.

> This is designed to help leverage the power of IaC to streamline and reproduce a Cloud infrastructure setup. By walking through the essentials of setting up an Amazon EKS cluster, configuring AWS IAM permissions, and integrating a PostgreSQL database and an OpenSearch domain (alternative to ElasticSearch), this guide explains the process of using Terraform with AWS, making it accessible even to those new to Terraform or IaC concepts.

Reviewer: I'd propose including a mentioning about managed postgres / os as I guess that's the prime difference of the Helm chart defaults.

:::tip

If you are completely new to Terraform and the idea of IaC, read through the [Terraform IaC documentation](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/tutorials/aws-get-started/infrastructure-as-code) and give their [interactive quick start](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/tutorials/aws-get-started/infrastructure-as-code#quick-start) a try for a basic understanding.

:::

## 0. Prerequisites

- An [AWS account](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/accounts/latest/reference/accounts-welcome.html) to create any resources within AWS.
- [Terraform (1.9+)](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/downloads)
- [Kubectl (1.30+)](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/#kubectl) to interact with the cluster.

> - [jq (1.7+)](https://jqlang.github.io/jq/download/) to interact with some terraform variables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [jq (1.7+)](https://jqlang.github.io/jq/download/) to interact with some Terraform variables.
```

- [IAM Roles for Service Accounts](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/iam-roles-for-service-accounts.html) (IRSA) configured.
  - This simplifies the setup by not relying on explicit credentials and instead creating a mapping between IAM roles and Kubernetes service account based on a trust relationship. A [blog post](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/containers/diving-into-iam-roles-for-service-accounts/) by AWS visualizes this on a technical level.
  - This allows a Kubernetes service account to temporarily impersonate an AWS IAM role to interact with AWS services like S3, RDS, or Route53 without having to supply explicit credentials.

>     Voici la correction du texte :

Reviewer: Quel outil d'IA utilisez-vous ?

>   - Usage of IRSA is recommended to use as it's an [EKS best practice](https://aws.github.io/aws-eks-best-practices/security/docs/iam/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - IRSA is recommended as an [EKS best practice](https://aws.github.io/aws-eks-best-practices/security/docs/iam/).
```

This guide is designed to help leverage the power of Infrastructure as Code (IaC) to streamline and reproduce a Cloud infrastructure setup. By walking through the essentials of setting up an Amazon EKS cluster, configuring AWS IAM permissions, and integrating a PostgreSQL database and an OpenSearch domain (as an alternative to ElasticSearch), this guide explains how to use Terraform with AWS, making it accessible even to those new to Terraform or IaC concepts. It utilizes AWS-managed services when available, providing these as an optional convenience that you can choose to use or not.

:::tip

If you are completely new to Terraform and the idea of IaC, read through the [Terraform IaC documentation](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/tutorials/aws-get-started/infrastructure-as-code) and give their [interactive quick start](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/tutorials/aws-get-started/infrastructure-as-code#quick-start) a try for a basic understanding.

:::

## 0. Introduction

> ### Requirements

Reviewer: just noticed AWS CLI is missing since it's being used for minimum the S3 bucket creation.

Reviewer: and terraform auth

Reviewer: yes yes, I'm just saying the AWS CLI is missing in the requirements since it's used by terraform and for the s3 bucket.

It is recommended to use this guide for building a robust and sustainable infrastructure over time. However, for a quicker trial or proof of concept, using the [eksctl](./eksctl.md) method may suffice.

This guide is designed to help leverage the power of Infrastructure as Code (IaC) to streamline and reproduce a Cloud infrastructure setup. By walking through the essentials of setting up an Amazon EKS cluster, configuring AWS IAM permissions, and integrating a PostgreSQL database and an OpenSearch domain (as an alternative to ElasticSearch), this guide explains how to use Terraform with AWS, making it accessible even to those new to Terraform or IaC concepts. It utilizes AWS-managed services when available, providing these as an optional convenience that you can choose to use or not.

:::tip

If you are completely new to Terraform and the idea of IaC, read through the [Terraform IaC documentation](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/tutorials/aws-get-started/infrastructure-as-code) and give their [interactive quick start](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/tutorials/aws-get-started/infrastructure-as-code#quick-start) a try for a basic understanding.

:::

> ## 0. Introduction

Reviewer 2: Same note here -- if this is a series of steps start with 1, otherwise remove numbers from headers entirely.

For the simplicity of this guide, certain best practices will be provided with links to additional documents, enabling you to explore the topic in more detail.

:::warning Cost management
Following this guide will incur costs on your Cloud provider account, namely for the managed Kubernetes service, running Kubernetes nodes in EC2, Elastic Block Storage (EBS), and Route53. More information can be found on [AWS](https://aws.amazon.com/eks/pricing/) and their [pricing calculator](https://calculator.aws/#/) as the total cost varies per region.
:::

> <!-- TODO : add architecture diagram --->

Reviewer: would it be `## 1. Architecture`? Where you visualize and describe it?

### Outcome

Following this tutorial and steps will result in:

- An Amazon EKS Kubernetes cluster running the latest Kubernetes version with four nodes ready for Camunda 8 installation.
- The [EBS CSI driver](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/ebs-csi.html) is installed and configured, which is used by the Camunda 8 Helm chart to create [persistent volumes](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/persistent-volumes/).
- A [managed Aurora PostgreSQL 15.8](https://aws.amazon.com/rds/postgresql/) instance to be used by the Camunda 8 components.
- An OpenSearch domain created and configured for use with the Camunda 8 platform, leveraging the capabilities of [AWS OpenSearch Service](https://aws.amazon.com/opensearch-service/).

> ## 1. Provisioning the Complete Infrastructure for Camunda 8 on AWS

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 1. Provisioning the complete infrastructure for Camunda 8 on AWS
```

### Terraform Prerequisites

> To manage the infrastructure for Camunda 8 on AWS using Terraform, we need to set up Terraform's backend to store the state file remotely in an S3 bucket. This ensures secure and persistent storage of the state file.

Reviewer: it sounds like a hard requirement?

While I agree that it makes sense, nothing speaks against any other backend that Terraform offers either.

Reviewer: it's also more or less introducing a hen and egg problem of `wait a minute, my s3 bucket isn't in IaC but I need one for IaC` 🤯

You can further change the region and other preferences and explore different [authentication](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/hashicorp/aws/latest/docs#authentication-and-configuration) methods.
Here are a few options to authenticate:

- **(Recommended)** Use the [AWS CLI](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/userguide/cli-chap-getting-started.html). If you have configured your AWS CLI, Terraform will automatically detect and use those credentials.

  To configure the AWS CLI:

  ```bash
  aws configure
  ```

  Enter your `AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID`, `AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY`, region, and output format which can be retrieved from the [AWS Console](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/IAM/latest/UserGuide/id_credentials_access-keys.html).

:::caution

A user who creates resources in AWS will always retain administrative access to those resources, including any Kubernetes clusters created. It is recommended to create a dedicated [AWS IAM user](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/IAM/latest/UserGuide/id_users.html) for Terraform purposes, ensuring that the resources are managed and owned by that user.

:::

> #### 1. Create an S3 Bucket for Terraform State Management

Reviewer: not entirely sure behind your motivation on this instead of leaving it up to the user on how they want to handle their terraform state.

   ```bash
   aws s3api create-bucket --bucket my-eks-tf-state --region $AWS_REGION \
     --create-bucket-configuration LocationConstraint=$AWS_REGION
   ```

3. **Enable versioning** on the S3 bucket to track changes and protect the state file from accidental deletions or overwrites:

   ```bash
   aws s3api put-bucket-versioning --bucket my-eks-tf-state --versioning-configuration Status=Enabled --region $AWS_REGION
   ```

4. **Secure the bucket** by blocking public access:

   ```bash
   aws s3api put-public-access-block --bucket my-eks-tf-state --public-access-block-configuration \
     "BlockPublicAcls=true,IgnorePublicAcls=true,BlockPublicPolicy=true,RestrictPublicBuckets=true" --region $AWS_REGION
   ```

5. **Verify versioning** is enabled on the bucket:

   ```bash
   aws s3api get-bucket-versioning --bucket my-eks-tf-state --region $AWS_REGION
   ```

This S3 bucket will now securely store your Terraform state files with versioning enabled.

#### 2. Create a `config.tf` with the Following Setup

Once the S3 bucket is created, configure your `config.tf` file to use the S3 backend for managing the Terraform state:

> <Tabs>

Reviewer: you should consider tab syncs via groupIds: https://docusaurus.io/docs/2.x/markdown-features/tabs#syncing-tab-choices

that way you can select `standard` or `irsa` and your whole doc switches to that option instead of having to select each individual tab.

Reviewer: @leiicamundi while you added groupIds now, they're all different.
The idea is to give all Tabs that should sync the same groupId, that way you can switch in the beginning to IRSA or Standard and all related Tabs switch to the same.
With individual groupIds per Tab this won't work.

example:

```
<Tabs groupId="tf">
<TabItem value="standard" label="Standard" default>
<TabItem value="irsa" label="Irsa">
</Tabs>

<Tabs groupId="tf">
<TabItem value="standard" label="Standard" default>
<TabItem value="irsa" label="Irsa">
</Tabs>

<Tabs groupId="bla">
<TabItem value="standard" label="Standard" default>
<TabItem value="irsa" label="Irsa">
</Tabs>
```

In this case the Tabs with groupId `tf` would sync but the one with `bla` not.

> <Tabs>

Reviewer: besides the above, I'm wondering behind the motivation of standard vs irsa config.tf?
They don't really differ except for the key, which doesn't matter much for a person that uses it?

> <Tabs>

Reviewer: You maybe want to mention somewhere in the doc, probably considerations or so, what the difference is between the two options.

  <TabItem value="standard" label="Standard" default>

```hcl reference
https://github.com/camunda/camunda-tf-eks-module/blob/feature/opensearch-doc/examples/camunda-8.6/config.tf
```

  </TabItem>
  <TabItem value="irsa" label="IRSA">

```hcl reference
https://github.com/camunda/camunda-tf-eks-module/blob/feature/opensearch-doc/examples/camunda-8.6-irsa/config.tf
```

  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

#### 3. Initialize Terraform

> Once your `config.tf` and authentication are set up, you can initialize your Terraform project. This will configure the backend and download the necessary provider plugins:

Reviewer: TIL: providers are also called plugins

```bash
terraform init
```

Terraform will connect to the S3 bucket to manage the state file, ensuring remote and persistent storage.

### EKS Cluster Module Setup

This module establishes the foundational configuration for AWS access and Terraform.

We will utilize [Terraform modules](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/modules), which allow us to abstract resources into reusable components, streamlining our infrastructure management.

The [Camunda-provided module](https://github.com/camunda/camunda-tf-eks-module) is publicly available and offers a robust starting point for deploying an EKS cluster. It is highly recommended to review this module prior to implementation to understand its structure and capabilities.

#### Steps to Set Up the EKS Cluster Module:

1. **Create a `cluster.tf` file** in the same directory as your `config.tf` file.
2. **Add the following content** to your newly created `cluster.tf` file to utilize the provided module:

> <Tabs>

Reviewer: here again, not sure why there are tabs if only the name changes.

Both can be set up with or without a **Domain** ([ingress](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/userguide/alb-ingress.html)).

## 1. Provisioning the complete infrastructure for Camunda 8 on AWS

### Terraform prerequisites

To manage the infrastructure for Camunda 8 on AWS using Terraform, we need to set up Terraform's backend to store the state file remotely in an S3 bucket. This ensures secure and persistent storage of the state file.

If you are an advanced user, you may want to handle this part differently and use a different backend. The backend setup provided is an example for new users.

#### 0. Set Up AWS authentication

The [AWS Terraform provider](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/hashicorp/aws/latest/docs) is required to create resources in AWS. Before you can use the provider, you must authenticate it using your AWS credentials.
You can further change the region and other preferences and explore different [authentication](https://registry.terraform.io/providers/hashicorp/aws/latest/docs#authentication-and-configuration) methods.

> Here are a few options to authenticate:

Reviewer: you can drop this, afaik there's only one option presented.

[Create access keys](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/IAM/latest/UserGuide/id_credentials_access-keys.html) for the new IAM user via the console and export them as `AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID` and `AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY` variables to use with the AWS CLI and `eksctl`

:::

#### 1. Create an S3 bucket for Terraform state management

Before setting up Terraform, you need to create an S3 bucket that will store the state file. This is important for collaboration and to prevent issues like state file corruption.

You can optionally set the region as an environment variable upfront to avoid repeating it in each command:

```bash
export AWS_REGION=<your-region>
```

Replace `<your-region>` with your chosen AWS region (e.g., `eu-central-1`).

Now, follow these steps to create the S3 bucket with versioning enabled:

1. **Open your terminal** and ensure the AWS CLI is installed and configured.

2. **Run the following command** to create the S3 bucket, using the previously set `AWS_REGION` environment variable:

   ```bash

>    aws s3api create-bucket --bucket my-eks-tf-state --region $AWS_REGION \

Reviewer: I'd suggest moving the name into an environment variable as well, makes it easier to use all the other commands.

S3 bucket names are globally unique, meaning whatever is defined there needs to be adjusted anyway by the user.

For more details, refer to the [official upgrade guide](https://github.com/terraform-aws-modules/terraform-aws-eks/blob/master/docs/UPGRADE-20.0.md).
:::

</p>
</details>

4. **Customize the cluster setup:**

   The module offers various input options that allow you to further customize the cluster configuration. For a comprehensive list of available options and detailed usage instructions, please refer to the [EKS module documentation](https://github.com/camunda/camunda-tf-eks-module/blob/2.6.0/modules/eks-cluster/README.md).

### PostgreSQL module setup

:::info Optional module

If you don't want to use this module, you can skip this section.
However, please note that you may need to adjust the following instructions to remove references to this module.

If you choose not to use this module, you'll need to either provide a managed PostgreSQL service or use the internal deployment by the Camunda Helm chart in Kubernetes.

:::

> The default PostgreSQL instance and database (`camunda`) created by this module is primarily intended for use with Keycloak. After the instance is set up, you may manually add additional databases for Identity multi-tenancy if needed, though this guide will not cover those steps, as the default configuration disables multi-tenancy.

Reviewer: this needs rephrasing as it's now covered in `create the database and associated access`

```

  </TabItem>
  <TabItem value="irsa" label="IRSA">

In addition to using standard username and password authentication, you can opt to use [**IRSA (IAM Roles for Service Accounts)**](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/opensource/introducing-fine-grained-iam-roles-service-accounts/) for secure, role-based access to your Aurora database. This method allows your EKS workloads to assume IAM roles without needing to manage AWS credentials directly.

**Note**: Using IRSA is optional. If preferred, you can continue using traditional password-based authentication for database access.

If you choose to use IRSA, you’ll need to take note of the **IAM role** created for Aurora and the **AWS Account ID**, as these will be used later to annotate the Kubernetes service account.

##### Aurora IRSA role and policy

The Aurora module uses outputs from the EKS cluster module to configure the IRSA role and policy. Below are the required parameters:

Here’s how to define the IAM role trust policy and access policy for Aurora:

```hcl reference
https://github.com/camunda/camunda-tf-eks-module/blob/feature/opensearch-doc/examples/camunda-8.6-irsa/db.tf
```

> Once the IRSA configuration is complete, make sure to **record the IAM role name** (from the `iam_aurora_role_name` configuration) and the **AWS Account ID** (from `module.eks_cluster.aws_caller_identity_account_id`), as these will be required to annotate the Kubernetes service accounts during the helm configuration.

Reviewer: what for do you need the `aws_caller_identity_account_id` in the following?
At least for this document I didn't find the usage.

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

#### Step 3: additional customization

You can further customize the Aurora cluster setup through various input options. Refer to the [Aurora module documentation](https://github.com/camunda/camunda-tf-eks-module/blob/2.6.0/modules/aurora/README.md) for more details on other customization options.

### OpenSearch module setup

:::info Optional module

If you don't want to use this module, you can skip this section.
However, please note that you may need to adjust the following instructions to remove references to this module.

> If you choose not to use this module, you'll need to either provide a managed ElasticSearch or OpenSearch service or use the internal deployment in Kubernetes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you choose not to use this module, you'll need to either provide a managed ElasticSearch or OpenSearch service or use the internal deployment by the Camunda Helm chart in Kubernetes.
```

:::

> The OpenSearch module creates an OpenSearch domain intended to be used by the Camunda platform. OpenSearch is a powerful alternative to ElasticSearch. For more information on how to use OpenSearch with Camunda, refer to the [Camunda documentation](./self-managed/setup/guides/using-existing-opensearch/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The OpenSearch module creates an OpenSearch domain intended for the Camunda platform. OpenSearch is a powerful alternative to Elasticsearch. For more information on using OpenSearch with Camunda, refer to the [Camunda documentation](./self-managed/setup/guides/using-existing-opensearch/).
```

  <TabItem value="standard" label="Standard" default>

:::caution Network based security

The standard deployment for OpenSearch relies on the first layer of security, which is the Network.

While this setup allows easy access, it may expose sensitive data. To enhance security, consider implementing IAM Roles for Service Accounts (IRSA) to restrict access to the OpenSearch cluster, providing a more secure environment.

For more information, see the [Amazon OpenSearch Service Fine-Grained Access Control documentation](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/opensearch-service/latest/developerguide/fgac.html#fgac-access-policies).
:::

```hcl reference
https://github.com/camunda/camunda-tf-eks-module/blob/feature/opensearch-doc/examples/camunda-8.6/opensearch.tf
```

  </TabItem>
  
  <TabItem value="irsa" label="IRSA">

In addition to traditional username and password authentication, you can also use [**IRSA (IAM Roles for Service Accounts)**](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/opensource/introducing-fine-grained-iam-roles-service-accounts/) to securely connect to OpenSearch. IRSA enables your Kubernetes workloads to assume IAM roles without managing AWS credentials directly.

> **Note**: Using IRSA is optional. If you prefer, you can continue using password-based access to your OpenSearch domain.

Reviewer: is the alternative password-based?

If you choose to use IRSA, you’ll need to take note of the **IAM role name** created for OpenSearch and the **AWS Account ID**, as these will be required later to annotate the Kubernetes service account.

##### OpenSearch IRSA role and policy

To configure IRSA for OpenSearch, the OpenSearch module uses outputs from the EKS cluster module to define the necessary IAM role and policies.

Here's an example of how to define the IAM role trust policy and access policy for OpenSearch:

```hcl reference
https://github.com/camunda/camunda-tf-eks-module/blob/feature/opensearch-doc/examples/camunda-8.6-irsa/opensearch.tf
```

> Once the IRSA configuration is complete, ensure you **record the IAM role name** (from the `iam_opensearch_role_name` configuration) and the **AWS Account ID** (from `module.eks_cluster.aws_caller_identity_account_id`). You will need these to annotate the Kubernetes service account in the next step.

Reviewer: same as above on the usage of `aws_caller_identity_accoun_id`

> This configuration will deploy an OpenSearch domain with advanced security enabled. You must provide your own username (`advanced_security_master_user_name`) and password for the master user (`advanced_security_master_user_password`).

Reviewer: do I even need username / password?
It feels counterintuitive to talk about IRSA being more secure, but then we slap username/password on top.

:::

1. Open a terminal in the created Terraform folder where `config.tf` and other `.tf` files are.

2. Plan the configuration files:

```bash
terraform plan -out cluster.plan # describe what will be created
```

3. After reviewing the plan, you can confirm and apply the changes.

```bash
terraform apply cluster.plan     # apply the creation
```

At this point, Terraform will create the Amazon EKS cluster with all the necessary configurations. The completion of this process may require approximately 20-30 minutes for each component.

### Reference files

Depending on the installation path you have chosen, you can find the reference files used on this page:

- **Standard Installation:** [Reference Files](https://github.com/camunda/camunda-tf-eks-module/blob/feature/opensearch-doc/examples/camunda-8.6/)
- **IRSA Installation:** [Reference Files](https://github.com/camunda/camunda-tf-eks-module/blob/feature/opensearch-doc/examples/camunda-8.6-irsa/)

## 2. Preparation for Camunda 8 installation

### Access the created EKS Cluster

You can gain access to the Amazon EKS cluster via the `AWS CLI` using the following command:

```shell

> aws eks --region "$AWS_REGION" update-kubeconfig --name <clusterName>

Reviewer: just a suggestion from my side to add `--alias <clusterName>`

so you end up with `<clusterName> in your k8s context instead of `arn:aws:eks:${AWS_REGION}:${ACCOUNT ID}:cluster/camunda-ci-eks`

```

After updating the kubeconfig, you can verify your connection to the cluster with kubectl:

```shell
kubectl get nodes
```

> Then ensure that a namespace exists for camunda

Reviewer: Maybe you could mention on why this is important as usually people would probably just let the Helm chart handle it.

2. **Pod within the EKS cluster**: Alternatively, deploy a pod in your EKS cluster equipped with the necessary tools to connect to the database.

The choice depends on your infrastructure setup and security preferences. In this tutorial, we'll use a pod within the EKS cluster to configure the database.

1. **Set the environment variables**: In your terminal, set the necessary environment variables that will be substituted in the setup manifest.

```bash
export AURORA_ENDPOINT=$(terraform output -raw postgres_endpoint)
export AURORA_PORT=5432
export AURORA_DB_NAME="$DEFAULT_DB_NAME"

# PostgreSQL Credentials (replace with your own values from the #postgresql-module-setup step)
export AURORA_USERNAME="$(terraform console <<<local.aurora_master_username | jq -r)"
export AURORA_PASSWORD="$(terraform console <<<local.aurora_master_password | jq -r)"
```

A **Kubernetes job** will connects to the database and creates the necessary users with the required privileges. The script installs the necessary dependencies and runs SQL commands to create the IRSA user and assign it the correct roles and privileges.

> 2. **Create a copy of the manifest**: Save the above manifest to a file, for example, `setup-postgres-create-db.yml`.

Reviewer: in this section, wouldn't you first create the secret and then the job that depends on those secrets?

Reviewer: ah just saw, you first tell to create and only later to apply.

### OpenSearch module setup

:::info Optional module

If you don't want to use this module, you can skip this section.
However, please note that you may need to adjust the following instructions to remove references to this module.

If you choose not to use this module, you'll need to either provide a managed Elasticsearch or OpenSearch service or use the internal deployment by the Camunda Helm chart in Kubernetes.
:::

The OpenSearch module creates an OpenSearch domain intended for Camunda platform. OpenSearch is a powerful alternative to Elasticsearch. For more information on using OpenSearch with Camunda, refer to the [Camunda documentation](./self-managed/setup/guides/using-existing-opensearch/).

:::note Available since Camunda 8.4

As of the 8.4 release, Zeebe, Operate, and Tasklist are now compatible with [Amazon OpenSearch Service](https://aws.amazon.com/de/opensearch-service/) 2.5.x. Note that using Amazon OpenSearch Service requires [setting up a new Camunda installation](/self-managed/setup/overview.md). A migration from previous versions or Elasticsearch environments is currently not supported.

> :::

Reviewer: same comment as in the eksctl doc on whether the note still makes sense or whether it should be just be simplified to not being able to mix and match the chosen "database".

It's a `next` version, where all components are compatible (some more than others ^^).

#### Step 1: create a configuration file for OpenSearch

1. In the folder where your `config.tf` file resides, create a new file named `opensearch.tf`.
2. Add the following content to `opensearch.tf` to make use of the provided OpenSearch module:

<Tabs groupId="env">
  <TabItem value="standard" label="Standard" default>

:::caution Network based security
The standard deployment for OpenSearch relies on the first layer of security, which is the Network.
While this setup allows easy access, it may expose sensitive data. To enhance security, consider implementing IAM Roles for Service Accounts (IRSA) to restrict access to the OpenSearch cluster, providing a more secure environment.
For more information, see the [Amazon OpenSearch Service Fine-Grained Access Control documentation](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/opensearch-service/latest/developerguide/fgac.html#fgac-access-policies).
:::

```hcl reference
https://github.com/camunda/camunda-tf-eks-module/blob/feature/opensearch-doc/examples/camunda-8.6/opensearch.tf
```

  </TabItem>
  
  <TabItem value="irsa" label="IRSA">

> In addition to standard authentication that uses anonynous user and rely on the network for the access control, you can also use [**IRSA (IAM Roles for Service Accounts)**](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/opensource/introducing-fine-grained-iam-roles-service-accounts/) to securely connect to OpenSearch. IRSA enables your Kubernetes workloads to assume IAM roles without managing AWS credentials directly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to standard authentication, which uses anonymous users and relies on the network for access control, you can also use [**IRSA (IAM Roles for Service Accounts)**](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/opensource/introducing-fine-grained-iam-roles-service-accounts/) to securely connect to OpenSearch. IRSA enables your Kubernetes workloads to assume IAM roles without managing AWS credentials directly.
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

#### Step 2: Additional customization

You can further customize the OpenSearch cluster setup using various input options. For a full list of available parameters, see the [OpenSearch module documentation](https://github.com/camunda/camunda-tf-eks-module/blob/2.6.0/modules/opensearch/README.md).

### Outputs

**Terraform** allows you to define outputs, which make it easier to retrieve important values generated during execution, such as database endpoints and other necessary configurations for Helm setup.

Each module that you have previously setup contains at the end the definition of the outputs. You can adjust them to your needs.

These outputs will allow you to easily reference the **cert-manager** ARN, **external-dns** ARN, and the endpoints for both **PostgreSQL** and **OpenSearch** in subsequent steps or scripts, streamlining your deployment process.

> ### Execution

Reviewer: does it make sense to move the `terraform init` here?

Since we did it initially but now we've added between 1-3 extra modules depending on usage and require another tf init -upgrade to continue.

Reviewer: nono, if you follow the instructions 1:1.

Create `cluster.tf`
> 3. Initialize Terraform
> terraform init

We add the modules for EKS and optionally for Postgres + OpenSearch

A lot further down the road.

> Execution
> terraform plan -out cluster.plan

problem is that at this point one would first have to run `terraform init` again as the modules have not been initialized yet.

```bash
kubectl get secret setup-db-secret -o yaml --namespace camunda
```

This should display the secret with the base64 encoded values.

3. **Create a copy of the manifest**: Save the above manifest to a file, for example, `setup-postgres-create-db.yml`.

```yaml reference
https://github.com/camunda/camunda-tf-eks-module/blob/feature/opensearch-doc/examples/camunda-8.6-irsa/setup-postgres-create-db.yml
```

  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

3. **Apply the manifest**: Once the secret is created, the **Job** manifest from the previous step can consume this secret to securely access the database credentials.

```bash
kubectl apply -f setup-postgres-create-db.yml --namespace camunda
```

4. **Verify the job's completion**: Once the job is created, you can monitor its progress using:

```bash
kubectl get job/create-setup-user-db --namespace camunda --watch
```

Once the job shows as `Completed`, the users and databases will have been successfully created.

5. **Check logs for confirmation**: You can view the logs of the job to confirm that the users were created and privileges were granted successfully:

```bash

> kubectl logs job/create-setup-user-db --namespace camunda

Reviewer: ```
Create keycloak user and associated database
ERROR:  database "camunda_keycloak" already exists
CREATE ROLE
GRANT
GRANT
GRANT ROLE
```

as discussed in the PM, we should mention in the script that it's expected or something.

:::

#### Steps to set up the OpenSearch domain module:

1. **Create a `opensearch.tf` file** in the same directory as your `config.tf` file.
2. **Add the following content** to your newly created `opensearch.tf` file to utilize the provided module:

<Tabs groupId="env">
  <TabItem value="standard" label="Standard" default>

:::caution Network based security
The standard deployment for OpenSearch relies on the first layer of security, which is the Network.
While this setup allows easy access, it may expose sensitive data. To enhance security, consider implementing IAM Roles for Service Accounts (IRSA) to restrict access to the OpenSearch cluster, providing a more secure environment.
For more information, see the [Amazon OpenSearch Service Fine-Grained Access Control documentation](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/opensearch-service/latest/developerguide/fgac.html#fgac-access-policies).
:::

```hcl reference
https://github.com/camunda/camunda-tf-eks-module/blob/main/examples/camunda-8.7/opensearch.tf
```

> <!-- Closing comment for compilation-->

Reviewer 2: Is this meant to be replaced?

You can access the created database in two ways:

1. **Bastion host**: Set up a bastion host within the same network to securely access the database.
2. **Pod within the EKS cluster**: Alternatively, deploy a pod in your EKS cluster equipped with the necessary tools to connect to the database.

The choice depends on your infrastructure setup and security preferences. In this tutorial, we'll use a pod within the EKS cluster to configure the database.

1. **Set the environment variables**: In your terminal, set the necessary environment variables that will be substituted in the setup manifest.

```bash reference
https://github.com/camunda/camunda-tf-eks-module/blob/main/examples/camunda-8.7/procedure/vars-create-db.sh
```

A **Kubernetes job** will connects to the database and creates the necessary users with the required privileges. The script installs the necessary dependencies and runs SQL commands to create the IRSA user and assign it the correct roles and privileges.

<Tabs groupId="env">
  <TabItem value="standard" label="Standard" default>

> 2. **Create a secret that references the environment variables**:

Reviewer 2: This should be step 1, yes?

Reviewer 2: I think the steps are numbered a bit out of order in this section.

```bash reference
https://github.com/camunda/camunda-tf-eks-module/blob/main/examples/camunda-8.7/procedure/create-setup-db-secret.sh
```

This command creates a secret named `setup-db-secret` and dynamically populates it with the values from your environment variables.

After running the above command, you can verify that the secret was created successfully by using:

```bash
kubectl get secret setup-db-secret -o yaml --namespace camunda
```

This should display the secret with the base64 encoded values.

3. **Create a copy of the manifest**: Save the above manifest to a file, for example, `setup-postgres-create-db.yml`.

```yaml reference
https://github.com/camunda/camunda-tf-eks-module/blob/main/examples/camunda-8.7/setup-postgres-create-db.yml
```

> <!-- Closing comment for compilation2-->

Reviewer 2: What is this referencing?
